PMID- 20301551
STAT- Publisher
DRDT- 20250213
CTDT- 20030915
PB  - University of Washington, Seattle
DP  - 1993
TI  - Sickle Cell Disease.
BTI - GeneReviews(®)
AB  - CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Sickle cell disease (SCD) is characterized by 
      intermittent vaso-occlusive events and chronic hemolytic anemia. Vaso-occlusive 
      events result in tissue ischemia leading to acute and chronic pain as well as 
      organ damage that can affect any organ system, including the bones, spleen, 
      liver, brain, lungs, kidneys, and joints. Dactylitis (pain and/or swelling of the 
      hands or feet) is often the earliest manifestation of SCD. In children, the 
      spleen can become engorged with blood cells in a "splenic sequestration." The 
      spleen is particularly vulnerable to infarction and the majority of individuals 
      with SCD who are not on hydroxyurea or transfusion therapy become functionally 
      asplenic in early childhood, increasing their risk for certain types of bacterial 
      infections, primarily encapsulated organisms. Acute chest syndrome (ACS) is a 
      major cause of mortality in SCD. Chronic hemolysis can result in varying degrees 
      of anemia, jaundice, cholelithiasis, and delayed growth and sexual maturation as 
      well as activating pathways that contribute to the pathophysiology directly. 
      Individuals with the highest rates of hemolysis are at higher risk for pulmonary 
      artery hypertension, priapism, and leg ulcers and may be relatively protected 
      from vaso-occlusive pain. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: SCD encompasses a group of disorders 
      characterized by the presence of at least one hemoglobin S allele (HbS; p.Glu6Val 
      in HBB) and a second HBB pathogenic variant resulting in abnormal hemoglobin 
      polymerization. Hb S/S (homozygous p.Glu6Val in HBB) accounts for the majority of 
      SCD. Other forms of SCD result from compound heterozygosity for HbS with other 
      specific pathogenic beta globin chain variants (e.g., sickle-hemoglobin C disease 
      [Hb S/C], sickle beta-thalassemia [Hb S/β(+)-thalassemia and Hb 
      S/β(0)-thalassemia], Hb S/D, Hb S/O(Arab), Hb S/E). The diagnosis of SCD is 
      established by identification of significant quantities of HbS with or without an 
      additional abnormal beta globin chain variant by hemoglobin assay or by 
      identification of biallelic HBB pathogenic variants including at least one 
      p.Glu6Val allele (e.g., homozygous p.Glu6Val; p.Glu6Val and a second HBB 
      pathogenic variant) on molecular genetic testing. Newborn screening for SCD began 
      in the United States in 1975 in New York and expanded to include all 50 states by 
      2006. Newborn screening programs perform isoelectric focusing and/or 
      high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) of an eluate of dried blood spots. 
      Some newborn screening programs confirm results with molecular testing. 
      MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Disease-modulating pharmacotherapies 
      (hydroxyurea, L-glutamine, and crizanlizumab); hematopoietic stem cell 
      transplantation; gene therapy. Supportive care: Education of parents, caregivers, 
      and affected individuals on avoidance of potential triggers of vaso-occlusion 
      (dehydration, climate extremes, overexertion, and, when possible, trauma and 
      infection), health maintenance, prophylactic medications, early interventions, 
      warning signs of acute illness, pain management options, and urgent care plan; 
      antibiotic prophylaxis for Streptococcus pneumoniæ; immunizations including those 
      for asplenic individuals; folic acid supplementation; red blood cell (RBC) 
      transfusion therapy and treatment for iron overload. Management of pain episodes 
      includes reversal of inciting triggers, hydration, anti-inflammatory agents, and 
      pain medication. Pain episodes are additionally managed with a multimodal 
      approach (e.g., warmth, massage, distraction, acupuncture, biofeedback, 
      self-hypnosis). RBC transfusion as needed for splenic sequestration; splenectomy 
      may be necessary. Fever and suspected infection are treated with appropriate 
      antibiotics. Life-threatening or severe complications (e.g., severe ACS, stroke, 
      aplastic crisis, chronic kidney failure) are often treated with RBC transfusion 
      or RBC exchange. Treatment of pulmonary hypertension generally includes treating 
      inciting factors and optimizing SCD therapy to stop progression; severe priapism 
      may require aspiration and irrigation. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
      or angiotensin II receptor blockers for those with kidney disease with kidney 
      transplant for end-stage kidney disease; mental health therapy and community 
      resources. Surveillance: Periodic comprehensive medical and social evaluation, 
      mental health and neurocognitive assessment, and routine dental care. Annual 
      complete blood count with differential and reticulocyte count; annual 
      transcranial Doppler to determine risk of stroke in all children with Hb S/S and 
      Hb S/β(0)-thalassemia; annual developmental assessment throughout childhood; 
      neurocognitive assessment prior to school entry and as needed; brain MRI in 
      childhood when examination can be tolerated without anesthesia and repeated as 
      needed; annual assessment of vitamin D level and kidney function (blood urea 
      nitrogen, serum creatinine, urinalysis, and urine microalbumin or urine 
      protein-to-creatinine ratio); ophthalmologic evaluation annually beginning at age 
      ten years. Because of the high frequency and severity of cardiopulmonary 
      complications there should be a particularly low threshold to obtain an 
      echocardiogram, pulmonary function tests, six-minute walk test, N-terminal 
      pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), and sleep study in individuals of any 
      age with cardiac or pulmonary concerns; EKG in those on medications that may 
      alter corrected QT interval; growth assessments throughout childhood; annual 
      assessment of iron status and liver function; MRI as needed to evaluate for iron 
      overload; assessment of mental health and social needs at least annually. 
      Agents/circumstances to avoid: Dehydration, extremes of temperature, physical 
      exhaustion, extremely high altitude, trauma, infection, recreational drugs with 
      vasoconstrictive or cardiac stimulation effects, and meperidine. Evaluation of 
      relatives at risk: Early diagnosis of at-risk family members allows for genetic 
      counseling as well as education and intervention before symptoms or end-organ 
      damage are present. Pregnancy management: Women with SCD who become pregnant 
      require close follow up and monitoring by a hematologist and obstetrician. 
      Increased risk for preterm labor, thrombosis, preeclampsia, infectious 
      complications, ACS, and acute painful episodes have been reported during 
      pregnancy. Hydroxyurea should be discontinued during pregnancy. GENETIC 
      COUNSELING: SCD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both parents 
      are known to be heterozygous for an HBB pathogenic variant, each sib of an 
      affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of inheriting biallelic beta 
      globin chain variants and being affected, a 50% chance of inheriting one beta 
      globin chain variant and being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting 
      neither of the familial beta globin chain variants. If the SCD-related HBB 
      pathogenic variants in a family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used 
      to identify which at-risk family members are heterozygous; if only one (or 
      neither) SCD-related HBB pathogenic variant in a family is known, HPLC can be 
      used to detect common qualitative abnormalities (i.e., abnormal hemoglobins). 
      Molecular genetic prenatal testing and preimplantation genetic testing for SCD 
      are possible when both HBB pathogenic variants have been identified in an 
      affected family member and the genetic status of the parents is known.
CI  - Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
      registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
      reserved. Test.
FED - Adam, Margaret P
ED  - Adam MP
FED - Bick, Sarah
ED  - Bick S
FED - Mirzaa, Ghayda M
ED  - Mirzaa GM
FED - Pagon, Roberta A
ED  - Pagon RA
FED - Wallace, Stephanie E
ED  - Wallace SE
FED - Amemiya, Anne
ED  - Amemiya A
FAU - Bender, MA
AU  - Bender MA
AD  - Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
FAU - Carlberg, Katie
AU  - Carlberg K
AD  - Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
LA  - eng
PT  - Review
PT  - Book Chapter
PL  - Seattle (WA)
OTO - NLM
OT  - Sickle Cell Disease Due to Hb S/S
OT  - Sickle-Hemoglobin C Disease (Hb S/C)
OT  - Sickle Beta-Thalassemia
OT  - Hemoglobin subunit beta
OT  - HBB
OT  - Sickle Cell Disease
EDAT- 2025/02/13 00:00
CRDT- 2025/02/13 00:00
AID - NBK1377 [bookaccession]
